# [Issue 14233](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/issues/14233)

Allow setting default AutoMinorLocator

----------------------------------------------------

This is a: **New Feature**.

## Description

In the `rcParams`, you can set a minor tick rate (grid lines) to be displayed for all of your plots. Missing from this is the ability to set a default rate for these ticks. The request is for a feature where you would be able to set this default value. 

## Location in code

Currently, the class `AutoMinorLocator` (which is responsible for dynamically finding the minor tick locations) does have a default, but you have no control over what it is (defaults to 4 or 5). This class is located in [`lib/matplotlib/ticker.py:2812`](https://github.com/CSCD01-team04/matplotlib/blob/3205ff797038fb4662b843faceeaaec1f63acef9/lib/matplotlib/ticker.py#L2812). The main section to change would be in the classes `__call__` method on line 2848. Here, we would need to check for the default value in `rcParams`, before falling back to the current 4 or 5 logic. 

## Time Estimate
1-2 hours

## Proposed Fix Outline
Find or add an object to the `rcParams` dict that stores a minor tick rate when minor ticks are turned on. Then update `AutoMinorLocator` to check and use this value before defaulting to 4 or 5. We would get the `rcParams` value with call similar to `mpl.rcParams['ticks.minor.count']`. `'ticks.minor.count'` is not currently a default dictionary value in [`lib/matplotlib/rcsetup.py:1286`](https://github.com/CSCD01-team04/matplotlib/blob/3205ff797038fb4662b843faceeaaec1f63acef9/lib/matplotlib/rcsetup.py#L1286), so we would either need to add it here, or use one of the values that is already there. Alternatively, we could add it to the rcParams dict when you enable minor ticks.