# [Issue 1460](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/issues/1460) #

Make Subplots Smarter With Regards To `subplot_kw` and `figure_kw`.

----------------------------------------------------

## Description

This feature would allow for "smarter" parsing of keywords passed to [`pyplot.subplots()`](https://github.com/CSCD01-team04/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/pyplot.py#L1034). Currently, dictionaries `subplot_kw` and `gridspec_kw` are used to differentiate keywords that are used for the instantiation of subplots and grid specifications. However, it was noted that using these dictionaries makes the code for calling the `pyplot.subplots()` method more complicated than it needs to be. 

Here is an example that demonstrates under the current implementation how [`pyplot.subplots()`](https://github.com/CSCD01-team04/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/pyplot.py#L1034) is supposed to be called: 
``` 
fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 2, subplot_kw=dict(polar=True))
```
However, a more elegant way of calling would be something similar to the following: 
``` 
fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 2, polar=True) 
```

This would only be possible if there were no ambiguities between keywords defined in `subplot_kw`, `gridspec_kw`, and `fig_kw`. If there were such ambiguities, then there is definitely a need for a separation of the keywords into their respective destinations. We attempted to implement this feature for Deliverable 2, by creating a list of possible arguments (unfortunately hard-coded) that could be passed as subplot keyword arguments. 

However, after a discussion with the maintainers in the [pull request](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/pull/16738) we submitted, two main points came up.
1. Since the arguments are cascadingly passed to other functions, hard-coding a list of arguments that are passed is both insufficient and inextendable. It serves as a temporary patch. Every time a new subplot keyword is introduced, it would need to be added to that list of arguments.
2. The changes made to accomodate passing the arguments without a dictionary should be extendable to `gridspec_kw`, which operates in the same way as `subplot_kw`.

Therefore for the completion of this feature, we need to allow "smart" parsing of `subplot_kw` and `gridspec_kw` keywords (without the use of dictionaries). We need `pyplot.subplots()` to handle the redirecting of these keywords to the methods to which they are offloaded. In a sense, the work of separating these arguments are lifted from the user. We would also need to do so without hard-coding the list of possible arguments that can be passed. 

## Affected Components & Location in Code

Describe each of the components that may be affected by the implementation of the feature. Describe how the existing interactions of the components are changed, and whether these changes are acceptable. Describe the benefits to be gained, and the disadvatages.

### Pyplot ###

As previously mentioned in Deliverable 1, `Pyplot` alone is considered as the scripting layer (one of the three layers in matplotlib). It provides wrappers for backend layer methods, as well as artist layer methods. For this documentation, we will be focusing on artist layer wrappers, namely `Pyplot.subplots()`.

`Pyplot.subplots()` is an artist layer wrapper. It is a shorthand method for creating common layouts of subplots, and the enclosing `Figure`, in a single call. It combines the work of creating multiple subplots, and the `Figure` containing them, which would normally be done with two calls.

```
fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 20))
ax = plt.subplot(111, axisbg='w')
```

Using `Pyplot.subplots()`, the above two lines are condensed to:

```
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 20), subplot_kw=dict(axisbg='w'))
```

To do so, `Pyplot.subplots()` accepts parameters needed to instantiate a new `Figure`, and also to generate a new `Axes` containing the subplots. Below is the definition of `Pyplot.subplots()`, with the docstring omitted.

```
def subplots(nrows=1, ncols=1, sharex=False, sharey=False, squeeze=True,
             subplot_kw=None, gridspec_kw=None, **fig_kw):
    fig = figure(**fig_kw)
    axs = fig.subplots(nrows=nrows, ncols=ncols, sharex=sharex, sharey=sharey,
                       squeeze=squeeze, subplot_kw=subplot_kw,
                       gridspec_kw=gridspec_kw)
    return fig, axs
```

The arguments used to instantiate a `Figure` is handled via keyword arguments in `**fig_kw`. This `Figure` is then used as a container for the subplots created. The rest of the arguments are delegated to the [`Figure.subplots()`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1423).

### Figure ###

As mentioned in Deliverable 1, `Figure` is a top-level container for `Artist` objects. It serves as a container for `Axes` (which is a container itself). `Figure` has multiple methods to help handling the `Artist` instances that it contains.

One such method is [`Figure.subplots()`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1423), which takes parameters `ncol`, `nrows`, `subplot_kw`, and `gridspec_kw`, among others. This method creates and adds a set of subplots to the `Figure`.

- **`ncols`**: the number of columns for the subplot grid.
- **`nrows`**: the number of rows for the subplot grid.
- **`subplots_kw`**: a dictionary with keywords that are used to create each subplot.
- **`gridspec_kw`**: a dictionary with keywords that are used to create the grid that the subplots are placed on.

This method returns either an `Axes` (if one subplot was created) or an array of `Axes` (if multiple subplots were created).

`Figure.subplots()` delegates the work of adding individual subplots to `Figure.add_subplot()`. We can see that `subplot_kw` is passed onto [`Figure.add_subplot`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py) below in [line 1566](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1566). This is because the keywords are used to style each individual subplot being added. This means that we can't easily omit the `subplot_kw` argument from `Pyplot`.

```
axarr[row, col] = self.add_subplot(gs[row, col], **subplot_kw)
```

## Design Choices

### Tracing ###

It would be useful to trace `Figure.subplots()` to see how it works. The `Pyplot.subplots()` method itself is short and straightforward and doesn't warrant much explanation. However, `Figure.subplots()` is where the `subplot_kw` and `gridspec_kw` parameters are being consumed.

In [lines 1551 to 1556](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1551), `gridspec_kw` is used to instantiate are used to instantiate [`GridSpec`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/gridspec.py#L238) to create a grid for subplots.

```
gs = GridSpec(nrows, ncols, figure=self, **gridspec_kw)
```

 We can know the possible values of `gridspec_kw` by checking the constructor for `GridSpec`.

```
def __init__(self, nrows, ncols, figure=None,
             left=None, bottom=None, right=None, top=None,
             wspace=None, hspace=None,
             width_ratios=None, height_ratios=None):
```

We can see that `GridSpec` takes the following parameters from `gridspec_kw`: `left`, `bottom`, `right`, `top`, `wspace`, `hspace`, `width_ratios`, and `height_ratios`. Next, an (`nrows` by `ncols`) array is created to hold the new subplots.

A new subplot is added for each "cell" in the grid. This is done in [lines 1559 to 1566](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1559). We create and add a subplot at line 1549 using `Figure.add_subplot()`, to which `subplot_kw` is passed again.

```
axarr[row, col] = self.add_subplot(gs[row, col], **subplot_kw)
```

`Figure.add_subplot()` takes `subplot_kw` as `**kwargs`. We can check where in this method the `subplot_kw` is consumed. It would seem that it is passed to the private method `Figure._make_key()` in [line 1389](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1389).

```
key = self._make_key(*args, **kwargs)
```

It is also passed to the private method `Figure._process_projection_requirements()` in [line 1392](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/figure.py#L1392). 

```
self._process_projection_requirements(*args, **kwargs)
```

It is also passed to `subplot_class_factory()` to create a new Subplot of type `projection_class`.

```
ax = subplot_class_factory(projection_class)(self, *args, **kwargs)
```

This instantiates a [`SubplotBase`](). It was mentioned that third party packages may use this, which adds to the difficulty of tracing what parameters can go into `subplot_kw`. Essentially, users can define their own `Subplot` classes, and subsequently define the parameters that they can handle.

### Changes ###

It would seem that any attempt to implement this function requires changing the code so that we are able to determine, at the time when `Pyplot.subplots()` is called, which parameters should belong to `subplot_kw`, `gridspec_kw`, and `fig_kw`. 

These parameters are difficult to gather because they are passed into constructors and methods that accept `**kwargs`. We can't fully know (unless a method/constructor is well-documented) what parameters to watch out for.

The changes necessary to implement this would include rigorous documentation. It would also help to get rid of the usage of `**kwargs`, and instead have all possible parameters defined explicitly. Of course, this has many drawbacks. Although the code might be easier to trace, it would make the code more verbose.

Then, we would somehow need a function that gathers all the parameters from the methods that consume the properties from `subplot_kw`, and compile them into a list, say `args`. This list would act as a filter. When `Pyplot.subplots()` is called, we can loop through `args` and pop any matching keywords from `**kwargs`. We store these keywords in `subplot_kw`. We handle `gridspec_kw` in the same manner.

For backwards compatibility, we cannot remove `subplot_kw`, nor `gridspec_kw` entirely. This would be a breaking change, and thus we should keep `subplot_kw` and instead introduce this as an additional functionality. This raises the possibility that a subplot keyword (or gridspec keyword) is provided both via `**kwargs` and `subplot_kw`. We can reasonably interpret that a parameter supplied via `subplot_kw` would mean that a user explicitly wants this parameter used for subplots. So if a parameter was passed with both `**kwargs` and `subplot_kw`, then the value passed with `subplot_kw` is honoured.

Note that there are no architectural changes involved in implementing this feature. There may be an additional helper function in `Pyplot.subplots()` for parsing the possible parameters and categorizing them into `subplot_kw`, `gridspec_kw`, and `fig_kw`.

## Time Estimate

It should take about 4 hours or so to carefully analyze where `subplot_kw` and `gridspec_kw` are being consumed. It would take an additional 24-48 hours (if at all possible) to come up with a function that gathers all the possible keywords for `subplot_kw` and `gridspec_kw`, and categorizes them into these dictionaries. This is because our team doesn't have much prior experience in the intricacies of reading a function, and extracting parameters from a function.

## Reason of Choice Not to Implement

We chose not to implement this feature for two reasons.

**Feasibility:** it may not be feasible to create a function that extracts all possible parameters. As mentioned previously, third party packages are able to define a Subplot that takes a custom set of parameters. It wouldn't be possible to account for the parameters defined in that case. 

**Design and Usability:** It seems that, even if it was feasible to create a function that extracts all possible keywords and categorizes them, we thought it was poor design. Essentially, we would need to run this function whenever `Pyplot.subplots()` is called, which is additional work, all for minor aesthetic value. Also, this functionality may not be desirable even aesthetically. For small use cases, such as the one given below, these is some benefit.

```
fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(10, 20), subplot_kw=dict(axisbg='w'))
```

However, if using larger sets of parameters, all of which can either go to `fig_kw`, `subplot_kw`, and `gridspec_kw`, then it would be better for the user to organize them into dictionaries. That way, the user gets to decide themselves where each parameter goes, instead of the developer.