# [Issue 7876](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/issues/7876) #

Errorbar: do not ignore inf but plot errorbar bigger than current frame size

----------------------------------------------------

## Reason of Choice to Implement ##

We chose to implement this issue for two reasons.

#### Intuitiveness #### 

The user who originally posted this issue did so due to the unintuitive, current representation of an infinite errorbar. Both the errorbars for `nan` and `inf` were represented in the same way. However, some users don't consider `nan` as being the same value as `inf`. It would benefit users (such as the original poster) to have a distinction between `nan` and `inf` errorbars. In addition to this, the representation that we choose is important. For `nan`, there should be a special marker in place of the errorbar, to indicate that the error is not a number. Similarly for `inf`, there should be a clearer representation: either a special marker, or a long errorbar extending to the limits of the plot. Either one of these representations is more intuitive than the current one.

#### Allowing User Choice #### 

As mentioned above, we are proposing two different representations of an `inf` errorbar. Both of these representations are from the discussions along the [issue](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/issues/7876). The original poster requested for a long errorbar, while a matplotlib maintainer suggested using a special symbol instead. We found that these were sound arguments for either representation. More importantly, we think that the choice of representation should not be made by developers, but rather deferred to the user. We will offer two ways to display an `inf` errorbar, and allowing the users to choose between them.

#### Backwards Compatibility ####

We don't want these changes to be optional the user. While we introduce these changes, we allow the default values: `inf_repr=None` and `nan_repr=None`. When these default values are set, then the current representation of `inf` and `nan` errorbars are displayed.

#### Feasibility #### 

It is important that we take on a feature that we can confidently document, test, and implement in two weeks. We explained why we chose not to implement the feature in issue 1460 [here](./1460.md). One of the reasons was that we did not know if it was feasible to implement the feature in our timeframe. The time estimate we provided was not a confident one. 

On the other hand, we are confident in the scope of this feature. We have successfully analyzed which components it may affect. We were also able to describe in detail the steps needed to implement the feature, and assessed that none of the requirements are risky. Thus, we are choosing to implement this feature.

## Planned Implementation ##

Here we will write in more detail how we plan to implement the changes described in [**Design Choices**](./7876.md). There, we detailed 4 changes we were going to make.

1. Create a special symbol in the case of a `nan` error range.
2. Allow the user to specify how the `inf` and `nan` error range is represented.
3. Create a special symbol in the case of an `inf` error range.
4. Handle the case of an `inf` error range by drawing an errorbar that extends to the upper and lower limits of the data line.

We will go through each of these changes and how they would be implemented, below. Note that all of these changes are to be made in the `Axes.errorbar()` method.

### Special symbol for `nan` errorbar ###

One of the changes will be in the private method `Axes.errorbar.extract_err(data, err)`. Currently, list comprehension is used to add and subtract the error ranges, as below.

```
low = [v - e for v, e in zip(data, a)]
high = [v + e for v, e in zip(data, b)]
```

This will not work when dealing with an `e` value of `nan`. Thus, we need to modify this function somehow, and account for an `e` value of `nan`.

We also need to add a case to when handling `if xerr is not None` in [line 3366](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3366). We need to handle the `inf` case for all three sub-cases.

```
if noxlims.any() or len(noxlims) == 0:
```
```
if xlolims.any():
```
and
```
if xuplims.any():
```
For all data points with an errorbar of `nan`, then we add a special type of marker for that errorbar. We handle similarly for `if yerr is not None` in [line 3415](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3415). 

### Handling user choice of representing `inf` and `nan` errorbar ###

This change would be in the `Axes.errorbar()` method. Firstly, we need to be prepared to handle an extra parameter, say `inf_repr`. This extra parameter is a `str` describing how the user wants the `inf` errorbar to be represented. For now, we only handle three possible values: `None`, `'bar'` or `'symbol'`. We would need to add documentation on the usage of `inf_repr` in the docstring. Depending on the value of `inf_repr`, we change the representation of the errorbar, as described below. To allow for backwards compatibility, if `inf_repr=None`, or `nan_repr=None`, then we maintain the same representation as now.   

### Special symbol for `inf` errorbar ###

This change would be similar to handling the special symbol for a `nan` errorbar. This change would also be in the private method `Axes.errorbar.extract_err(data, err)`. Similarly to the above, we add another case checking for the value of `inf` when using list comprehension.

Note that we only choose this representation if `inf_repr='symbol'`. As with the symbol for `nan`, we add a special type of marker for all data points with an errorbar of `inf` to each of the three sub-cases found when handling [`xerr`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3366), and [`yerr`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3415).

### Special long errorbar for `inf` ###

This change would also be in the private method `Axes.errorbar.extract_err(data, err)`. As above, we use the case for handling `inf` when using list comprehension. We only choose this representation if `inf_repr='bar'`. To get an errorbar that extends to the lower and upper limits of the data line, we would need to calculate the upper and lower limits of `data_line`, and supply that instead of `v - e` or `v + e`. 

Then, when handling the [`xerr`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3366) and [`yerr`](https://github.com/matplotlib/matplotlib/blob/master/lib/matplotlib/axes/_axes.py#L3415) we provide a special errorbar extending for this range. We will omit the capline (if needed) to represent an unbounded error.

## Time Estimate

Implementing the above steps, if all goes well, should take about 16-24 hours. We are taking into account any subtleties we have missed during documentation and design. Testing the feature and documenting it (i.e. adding to docstring) should take about 8-16 hours.
